Diagnosing Alzheimer's: How Alzheimer's is diagnosed - Mayo Clinic
This content does not have an English version.
This content does not have an Arabic version.
Skip to contentCare at
Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health
Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical
Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education
at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to
Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation
Request appointment Log inSearchMenu Request appointment Donate Diseases & conditions Find a doctorCare at Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation
Appointments at Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic offers appointments in Arizona, Florida and Minnesota and at Mayo Clinic Health System locations.
Request Appointment
Diagnosing Alzheimer's: How Alzheimer's is diagnosed
Print
Sections
Products and services
Diagnosing Alzheimer's: How Alzheimer's is diagnosedTo diagnose Alzheimer's dementia, healthcare professionals conduct tests to measure memory impairment and other thinking skills. They also judge functional abilities and identify behavior changes. A series of tests can rule out other possible causes of symptoms.By Mayo Clinic Staff
Alzheimer's dementia can be diagnosed in several different ways. Often, Alzheimer's is diagnosed through an exam by a member of your healthcare team. The healthcare professional evaluates your symptoms and may order several tests. The health professional may talk to your friends and family members to find out more about your symptoms and behavior.
It's important to get an accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer's, the most common type of dementia. The correct diagnosis is an important first step toward getting the appropriate treatment, care, family education and plans for the future.
Early symptoms of Alzheimer's dementia
Early symptoms of Alzheimer's dementia include:
Memory impairment, such as trouble remembering events.
Having a hard time concentrating, planning or problem-solving.
Trouble finishing daily tasks at home or at work, such as writing or using eating utensils.
Confusion with location or passage of time.
Having visual or spacial issues, such as not understanding distance in driving, getting lost or misplacing items.
Trouble with language, such as not being able to find the right word or having a reduced vocabulary in speech or writing.
Using poor judgment in decisions.
Withdrawal from work events or social engagements.
Changes in mood, such as depression or other behavior and personality changes.
Alzheimer's dementia can affect several aspects of your daily life.
When warning signs of Alzheimer's dementia appear, it's important that you get a prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Diagnosing Alzheimer's dementia
To diagnose Alzheimer's dementia, you might see your healthcare professional. Or you might see a doctor trained in brain conditions, known as a neurologist, or a doctor trained to treat older adults, known as a geriatrician. The doctor or other healthcare professional reviews your symptoms, medical history and medicine history. Your health professional may interview someone who knows you well, such as a close friend or family member. You'll also have a physical exam and several tests.
During your appointment, your healthcare professional looks at:
Whether you have impaired memory or thinking skills, also known as cognitive skills.
Whether you exhibit changes in personality or behaviors.
The degree of your memory or thinking impairment or changes.
How thinking impairment affects your ability to function in daily life.
The cause of your symptoms.
You may need lab tests, brain-imaging tests or detailed memory testing. These tests can provide useful information for a diagnosis. They also can rule out other conditions that cause similar symptoms.
Ruling out other conditions
Doctors and other healthcare professionals give you a physical exam and check that you don't have other health conditions that could be causing or contributing to your symptoms. They may look for signs of past strokes, Parkinson's disease, depression, sleep apnea or other medical conditions.
Testing memory loss and other symptoms
Your healthcare professional may ask you to answer questions or perform tasks that measure your cognitive skills. The tasks help to evaluate your memory, abstract thinking, problem-solving, language usage and related skills.
Mental status testing. This test focuses on your thinking skills, known as cognitive skills, and memory. The scores on these tests can reveal the degree of cognitive impairment.
Neuropsychological tests. You may see a specialist trained in brain conditions and mental health conditions, known as a neuropsychologist. This specialist can do extensive tests of your memory and cognitive skills.
The tests help your doctor and other healthcare professionals determine if you have dementia. They help your healthcare team know if you're able to safely complete daily tasks, such as taking medicines as scheduled and managing your finances. These tests also provide information on what you can still do as well as what you may have lost. And they can tell your healthcare professional if depression may be causing your symptoms.
Interviews with friends and family. Doctors and other healthcare professionals may ask your family members or friends questions about you and your behavior.
Healthcare professionals look for details that don't fit with your former level of function. Family members or friends often can explain how your cognitive skills, functional abilities and behaviors have changed over time.
These tests, the physical exam, and information on age and duration of worsening symptoms often are enough to diagnose Alzheimer's dementia. However, when the diagnosis isn't clear, healthcare professionals may need to order additional tests.
Laboratory tests
You may need lab tests to rule out other conditions that cause symptoms similar to Alzheimer's dementia. For example, you might be tested for a thyroid condition or not having enough vitamin B-12 in the body.
A cerebrospinal fluid test may be recommended to help diagnose Alzheimer's. Amyloid and tau proteins can be measured in the fluid. The ratio of these proteins can help determine if you have Alzheimer's dementia. Most of the time, a cerebrospinal fluid test is not necessary for a diagnosis. But the test may be useful in some instances or if symptoms are rapidly getting worse.
Brain imaging tests
Alzheimer's dementia results from the loss of brain cells over time. This is known as degeneration. Degeneration may appear in a variety of ways in brain scans.
However, these scans alone aren't enough to make a diagnosis. Scans aren't used to diagnose Alzheimer's dementia because there is overlap in what is considered typical age-related change in the brain and change related to Alzheimer's.
However, brain imaging can help:
Rule out other causes, such as heavy bleeding, brain tumors or strokes.
Distinguish between different types of degenerative brain disease.
Establish a baseline about the degree of degeneration.
The brain-imaging technologies most often used are:
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). An MRI uses powerful radio waves and magnets to create a detailed view of your brain.
Computerized tomography (CT). A CT scan uses X-rays to obtain cross-sectional images of your brain.
Positron emission tomography (PET). A PET scan uses a radioactive substance known as a tracer to detect substances in the body. There are different types of PET scans. The most commonly used PET scan is a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scan. This scan can identify brain regions with decreased glucose metabolism. The pattern of metabolism change can distinguish between different types of degenerative brain disease.
PET scans have recently been developed that detect clusters of amyloid proteins, known as plaques, or tau, known as neurofibrillary tangles. Both are associated with Alzheimer's dementia. These types of PET scans are typically used in the research setting.
Future of diagnosis
Researchers are working on new ways to diagnose Alzheimer's dementia earlier. New tests might be able to diagnose the disease when symptoms are very mild or even before symptoms start. Currently, researchers are developing tests that measure amyloid or tau in the blood. These tests are promising and may be used to pinpoint who is at risk of Alzheimer's dementia, and whether Alzheimer's is the cause of dementia.
Scientists are investigating several disease markers and diagnostic tests. These biomarkers include genes and proteins, including tau, related to Alzheimer's. New imaging tests also are being developed. These may help indicate whether you have Alzheimer's dementia and how much the disease has progressed. However, more research on these tests is necessary.
Benefit of an early diagnosis
Some people feel nervous about seeing a healthcare professional when they or a family member has memory issues. Some people hide their symptoms, or family members cover for them. It can be hard to deal with the losses that Alzheimer's dementia can bring, such as losing independence and the ability to drive.
While there's no cure for Alzheimer's, an early diagnosis can still be helpful. Knowing what you can do is just as important as knowing what you can't do. If another treatable condition is causing memory loss, your healthcare team can start treatments.
For those with Alzheimer's dementia, starting medicines early can help slow the decline in memory and other cognitive skills. Other medicines and interventions can help manage symptoms. You also may be able to participate in clinical trials.
You and your caregivers can learn strategies to manage your changes in skills and to reduce how Alzheimer's dementia affects everyday life. Strategies include learning how to make your home safer, establish routines and plan activities.
An early diagnosis also helps you, your family and caregivers plan for the future. You'll have the chance to make informed decisions on a number of issues, such as:
Appropriate community services and resources.
Options for residential and at-home care.
Plans for handling financial issues.
Expectations for future care and medical decisions.
When healthcare professionals diagnose you or a family member with Alzheimer's, they can help you understand the disease. They can answer your questions and explain what to expect. Your healthcare team can help you figure out ways to maintain independence, health and safety.
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Address 1
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which
information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with
other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could
include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected
health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health
information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of
privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on
the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Sorry something went wrong with your subscription
Please, try again in a couple of minutes
Retry
ShareTweet
March 13, 2024
Show references
Wolk DA, et al. Clinical features and diagnosis of Alzheimer disease. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/search. Accessed March 17, 2022.
Medical tests for diagnosing Alzheimer's. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/diagnosis/medical_tests. Accessed March 17, 2022.
How is Alzheimer's disease diagnosed? National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/how-alzheimers-disease-diagnosed. Accessed March 17, 2022.
Alzheimer's disease fact sheet. National Institute of Health. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers-disease-fact-sheet. Accessed March 17, 2022.
10 early signs and symptoms of Alzheimer's. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/10_signs. Accessed March 17, 2022.
Halter JB, et al. Dementia including Alzheimer's disease. In: Hazzard's Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology. 7th ed. The McGraw-Hill Companies; 2017. https://www.accessmedicine.mhmedical.com. Accessed March 17, 2022.
Tips for daily life. Alzheimer's Association. http://www.alz.org/i-have-alz/tips-for-daily-life.asp. Accessed March 17, 2022.
Graff-Radford J (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. March 21, 2022.
Hampel H, et al. Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: Current state and future use in a transformed global healthcare landscape. Neuron. 2023; doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.017.
Zhou R, et al. PET imaging of neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's disease. Frontiers in Immunology. 2021; doi:10.3389/fimmu.2021.739130.
See more In-depth
Products and ServicesA Book: Mayo Clinic on Alzheimer's DiseaseAssortment of Products for Independent Living from Mayo Clinic StoreA Book: Mayo Clinic on Healthy AgingA Book: Day to Day: Living With DementiaGive today to find Alzheimer's cures for tomorrow
See alsoAlzheimer's sleep problemsAlzheimer's: New treatmentsAlzheimer's 101Understanding the difference between dementia typesAlzheimer's diseaseAlzheimer's genesAlzheimer's drugsAlzheimer's prevention: Does it exist?Alzheimer's stagesAntidepressant withdrawal: Is there such a thing?Antidepressants and alcohol: What's the concern?Antidepressants and weight gain: What causes it?Antidepressants: Can they stop working?Antidepressants: Side effectsAntidepressants: Selecting one that's right for youAntidepressants: Which cause the fewest sexual side effects?Anxiety disordersAtypical antidepressantsCaregiver stressClinical depression: What does that mean?Corticobasal degeneration (corticobasal syndrome)CT scanDepression and anxiety: Can I have both?Depression, anxiety and exerciseWhat is depression? A Mayo Clinic expert explains.Depression in women: Understanding the gender gapDepression (major depressive disorder)Depression: Supporting a family member or friendDid the definition of Alzheimer's disease change?How your brain worksIntermittent fastingLecanemab for Alzheimer's diseaseMale depression: Understanding the issuesMAOIs and diet: Is it necessary to restrict tyramine?Marijuana and depressionMayo Clinic Minute: 3 tips to reduce your risk of Alzheimer's diseaseMayo Clinic Minute: Alzheimer's disease risk and lifestyleMayo Clinic Minute: New definition of Alzheimer's changesMayo Clinic Minute: Women and Alzheimer's DiseaseMemory loss: When to seek helpMonoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)MRINatural remedies for depression: Are they effective?Nervous breakdown: What does it mean?New Alzheimers ResearchPain and depression: Is there a link?Phantosmia: What causes olfactory hallucinations?Positron emission tomography scanPosterior cortical atrophySeeing inside the heart with MRISelective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)Sundowning: Late-day confusionTreatment-resistant depressionTricyclic antidepressantsVideo: Alzheimer's drug shows early promiseMRIVitamin B-12 and depressionYoung-onset Alzheimer'sShow more related content
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
NEW: Listen to Health Matters Podcast - Mayo Clinic PressNEW: Listen to Health Matters PodcastMayo Clinic on Incontinence - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on IncontinenceThe Essential Diabetes Book - Mayo Clinic PressThe Essential Diabetes BookMayo Clinic on Hearing and Balance - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on Hearing and BalanceFREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment - Mayo Clinic PressFREE Mayo Clinic Diet AssessmentMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
.
ART-20048075
Home
Diagnosing Alzheimers How Alzheimer s is diagnosed
Your gift holds great power – donate today! DonateMake your tax-deductible gift and be a part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.
Donate
Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newslettersAbout Mayo Clinic
About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Medicare Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Media Requests News Network Price TransparencyMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationStudents
Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty PortalStudents
Degree Programs Admissions Requirements Student & Faculty PortalResearchers
Research Faculty LaboratoriesInternational Patients
Appointments Financial Services International Locations & OfficesCharitable Care & Financial Assistance
Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – MinnesotaFollow Mayo Clinic X Youtube Facebook Linkedin InstagramGet the Mayo Clinic app
Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising and Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage CookiesLanguage:English English Español العربية 简体中文© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.
Language:English English Español العربية 简体中文