Alzheimer’s Disease: What You Need to Know as You Age | Johns Hopkins Medicine
Hurricane Milton updates for our Florida patients
Get updates about Hurricane Milton’s impact on Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital and our outpatient centers in Florida.
Skip to Main Content
Johns Hopkins Medicine
Menu
Johns Hopkins Medicine Home
About
Patient Care
Health
Research
School of Medicine
MyChart
Schedule an Appointment
Find a Doctor
Pay Your Bill
Employment
Close
Covid-19
Masks Strongly Recommended but Not Required in Maryland
Respiratory viruses continue to circulate in Maryland, so masking remains strongly recommended when you visit Johns Hopkins Medicine clinical locations in Maryland. To protect your loved one, please do not visit if you are sick or have a COVID-19 positive test result. Get more resources on masking and COVID-19 precautions.
Vaccines
Masking Guidelines
Visitor Guidelines
Close
Search
Search Johns Hopkins Medicine
Search
Close
Health
Health
Close
Main Menu
Health Main Menu
Health
Conditions and Diseases
Treatments, Tests and Therapies
Wellness and Prevention
Caregiving
Home
Health
Conditions and Diseases
Alzheimer’s Disease: What You Need to Know as You Age
Aging Well
Mind and Memory
Alzheimer's Disease
Dementia
Reviewed By:
Constantine George Lyketsos, M.D.
An estimated 5.2 million Americans are living with
Alzheimer’s disease
(AD), the most common form of
dementia
in the world and the sixth leading cause of death in the United States.
Today’s statistics are just the tip of the iceberg, however. By 2025, the
number of people afflicted will top 7 million—a 40 percent jump—as baby
boomers continue to age and people live longer overall.
Although the risk of AD increases with age, it is not a usual part
of aging or something that should be expected in older people, says
Constantine Lyketsos, M.D., director of the Memory and Alzheimer’s Treatment Center at Johns Hopkins.
In fact, early onset Alzheimer’s can occur in people younger than 65,
although it accounts for a small number of all cases. The rest are
classified as late onset.
Alzheimer’s and many other dementias occur as a result of damage to
neurons
in the brain that affects their ability to communicate with each other.
Over time, those neurons’ death and malfunction affects memory, learning,
mood, behavior, and eventually physical functions, such as walking, and
swallowing.
Prevention
While healthy living can help prevent risk factor conditions associated with Alzheimer’s disease, certain aspects on their
own can also reduce the risk of AD itself. Here are some powerful places to
start:
Keep moving.
Numerous studies suggest that staying active may reduce the risk of AD,
likely by increasing blood flow to the brain and improving the brain’s use
of oxygen and glucose, as well as building denser
blood vessels
in the brain.
Follow a Mediterranean diet.
That means
lean protein
with little, if any, red meat, lots of fruits and vegetables,
whole grains, olive oil as the primary fat and a little wine (with your doctor’s OK).
Studies have found this type of diet might reduce the risk of AD regardless
of how physically active you are or if you have any cardiovascular
problems.
Challenge your brain.
Studies have found that people who remain intellectually active are less
likely to develop dementia, as are those who remain socially engaged.
Activities to consider include taking classes just for the stimulation,
learning a new language, reading challenging books and learning to play a
musical instrument.
Protect your head.
Another risk factor for AD is
traumatic brain injury (TBI), especially repeated concussions. You can reduce your risk of TBI by
wearing a seat belt when you drive or are in any motor vehicle and wearing
a helmet when you engage in several activities: riding a bike, a horse or
any motorized device (such as a motorcycle or snowmobile); using in-line
skates or a skateboard; playing contact sports, like football or ice hockey
(including when batting or running the bases in baseball or softball); and
skiing or snowboarding.
Diagnosis
Alzheimer’s disease has traditionally been diagnosed by excluding any other
reason for these symptoms:
Memory loss that disrupts daily life
, such as forgetting important dates or events and not remembering them
later, asking for the same information again and again, and relying on
notes and other clues to remember things. Ironically, earlier life
memories are often unaffected until later in the disease.
Challenges planning or solving problems
, such as following recipes, paying bills and concentrating.
Problems completing everyday tasks
, such as driving to a familiar location, managing a budget and
remembering the rules of a game.
Confusing time or place
, such as forgetting where you are or how you got there.
Trouble understanding visual images and spatial relationships
, such as problems reading or judging distance.
Problems speaking or writing
, such as not being able to participate in a conversation and calling
things by the wrong name.
Misplacing items
and not being able to retrace your steps.
Changes in judgment
, such as giving away money to unknown people or organizations.
Withdrawing from work or social activities
, often because of embarrassment or shame about changes in memory and
other areas.
Changes in mood and personality
, including becoming depressed, anxious, fearful and suspicious.
Health care teams are acquiring more diagnostic tools as researchers
identify new biomarkers in the brain, cerebrospinal fluid and blood that
can help diagnose the disease earlier.
Alzheimer’s disease has traditionally been diagnosed as mild, moderate, or
severe. However, with new imaging approaches and biomarkers, three new
stages have been proposed:
1. Preclinical Alzheimer’s
This stage is marked by subtle changes in the brain,
biomarkers
in the cerebrospinal fluid, or blood. At this stage, the individual has not
yet developed any memory problems or other symptoms.
2. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) or Mild behavioral impairment (MBI)
At this stage, there are some changes in memory and other
cognitive functions
or in mood, behavior and personality, but not enough to affect independent
functioning in daily life. Screening for MCI and MBI is increasingly used
to diagnose people who might be at risk of developing Alzheimer’s
or other dementias, with studies finding that about half of those diagnosed
with MCI or MBI eventually develop dementia (although not necessarily
Alzheimer’s).
3. Dementia
At this stage, people with AD exhibit severe memory loss and other
cognitive and physical impairment.
Treatment
There is no cure for AD, but there is a lot that can be done to improve
symptoms and quality of life for both patients and
caregivers. The goal of care is to maintain a good quality of life, says Lyketsos.
That involves a “package” of memory care activities using available FDA
approved medications, coordinating care between clinicians, and
participating in social activities; and for caregivers, joining a support
group.
Drugs are approved for treating the cognitive symptoms of Alzheimer’s
disease but not the underlying causes. The benefits are relatively slight,
slowing the progression of AD by six to 12 months.
Cholinesterase inhibitors
prevent the breakdown of acetylcholine, an important chemical for
learning and memory.
The drug memantine
is typically used in the later stages of Alzheimer’s and may be
combined with a cholinesterase inhibitor. It works by regulating
glutamate, another chemical involved in learning and memory.
Research into new treatments for Alzheimer’s disease—specifically drugs
that target the disease and not just its symptoms—is very active, both
at Johns Hopkins and elsewhere. The best hope lies in attacking
abnormalities commonly seen in Alzheimer’s:
amyloid beta-plaques,
tau protein
tangles and
inflammation.
People with Alzheimer’s disease may also be prescribed other medications to
manage symptoms, including antidepressants or antipsychotics to reduce
depression, agitation, anxiety, or to improve sleep. Antipsychotics when
indicated might be used to manage severe symptoms such as aggression or
delusions but should be used under the guidance of a specialist.
Learn more about the
symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease
in the
Health Library.
Living With AD
Living with AD means living as healthy a life as possible and maintaining
regular activities for as long as possible. In addition, create support
systems and take these proactive measures:
Pull together a care team.
It’s best to have a team of clinicians—including physicians; mental health
professionals; occupational, speech and physical therapists; nutritionists
and others—to help manage the disease. Also connect with nonmedical
professionals, such as a financial adviser and attorney, to prepare various
legal and medical documents, as well as to plan to manage the cost of care
and your family’s future.
Treat neuropsychiatric symptoms such as depression or agitation.
Talk to your health care providers about ways to manage these symptoms—with
or without medication.
Put exercise on your schedule.
Numerous studies have found that regular physical activity not only
protects against AD but slows its progression—possibly by producing a
stress hormone that protects the brain from memory changes.
Get a good night’s sleep.
Poor sleep may speed the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Thus, Lyketsos
says, it is important to practice good sleep hygiene.That means using the
bedroom only for sleep, making the room as dark and quiet as possible,
having a presleep routine you practice every evening to prepare you for
sleep, and going to bed and getting up at the same time every day.
Give yourself time to cope.
Learning that you have a
degenerative disease
like AD may be difficult for you and your family. A support group can help.
Research
Johns Hopkins researchers and clinicians continue their work in
understanding and treating Alzheimer’s in ways that can translate into
better health today. Notable research includes these findings:
It may become possible to detect Alzheimer’s disease before symptoms
start.
Researchers at Johns Hopkins found that the ratios of tau proteins and
amyloid beta-proteins in cerebrospinal fluid could predict mild cognitive
impairment more than five years before symptoms begin, while changes in the
ratio over time also predicted cognitive changes.
Sleep duration and quality may be linked to a biomarker of Alzheimer’s
disease.
Johns Hopkins researchers found that the less people slept, and the worse
their sleep, the more likely they were to show higher levels of amyloid
beta-proteins in their brains.
Scientists have plotted the maze-like paths taken by the first cells to
degenerate in people with Alzheimer's disease.
Cholinergic neurons, some of the largest nerve cells in the mammalian
brain, are the first cells to degenerate in people with Alzheimer's
disease. These neural maps may help researchers understand what goes wrong
during the progression of the disease.
#TomorrowsDiscoveries: Using Data to Diagnose Brain Diseases | Michael I. Miller, Ph.D.
Watch on YouTube
-
Johns Hopkins researcher Michael Miller explains how we can use data to create better diagnostic tools for neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer's disease.
For Caregivers
Family and friends provide the bulk of care for people with AD, which can
be incredibly stressful and affect caregivers’ physical and mental health.
You can help your loved one live with the disease with specific actions
like these:
Encourage independence.
This is particularly important in the early stages of the disease, when a
person may still function quite well. So treat him as an adult, not a
child, and give him as much independence as possible.
Set structure.
A scheduled day that provides activities for people with AD helps manage
and even prevent neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as agitation and
depression, says Lyketsos.
Be your loved one’s memory.
It’s up to you to remember appointments, words or names, people and places.
Gently remind your loved one of these things when appropriate, but don’t
embarrass her, says Lyketsos.You’ll also need to become (or appoint) the
person who remembers medications and manages your loved one’s finances.
Listen.
The frustration, depression, anxiety and anger that come with an AD
diagnosis and the disease’s prognosis are tremendous. Be there to listen.
But make sure you have your own support system that helps you with your
frustrations and anger.
Live in the day.
You can’t change what happened yesterday, and you can’t predict what will
happen tomorrow. But you can enjoy the time you have with your
loved one today.
Reduce your expectations.
If you keep expecting your loved one to remember tasks, things you said and
people’s names, you will be disappointed. However, if you don’t expect this
and he does remember these things, you will be pleasantly
surprised.
Treatment
Memory Care Services from the Comfort of Home
Caring for a loved one experiencing memory loss can feel overwhelming, but you don’t have to go it alone. Receive experienced and compassionate memory care services designed to keep your loved one at home longer — and improve the quality of life for your entire family.
More About Johns Hopkins Care at Home Memory Services
Definitions
Amyloid-beta proteins (am-uh-loyd bay-tuh pro-teenz): The sticky proteins
that form brain plaques. Amyloid beta forms when proteins are removed from
the outer wall of neurons. Instead of doing beneficial jobs, they clump
together. Small clumps may interfere with the signals between brain cells.
But when the clumps keep growing, they create the well-known plaques found
in the brains of people with Alzheimer’s disease.
Biomarkers (buy-oh-mahr-kerz): Factors that can be measured and used to
give a clearer picture of a person’s health now and in the future.
Biomarkers include blood pressure, cholesterol, blood sugar and
bone-density test results. Researchers use biomarkers in studies to find
new connections between risks, such as chronic inflammation, and health.
Blood vessels (veh-suls): The system of flexible tubes—arteries,
capillaries and veins—that carries blood through the body. Oxygen and
nutrients are delivered by arteries to tiny, thin-walled capillaries that
feed them to cells and pick up waste material, including carbon dioxide.
Capillaries pass the waste to veins, which take the blood back to the heart
and lungs, where carbon dioxide is let out through your breath as you
exhale.
Degenerative disease (dih-jen-er-uh-tiv dih-zeez): An illness that causes
ongoing, increasing harm to tissue in the body. Examples include
Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, both of which affect the brain
and nervous system; osteoarthritis, which affects joints; degenerative
disease of the spine; and age-related macular degeneration, which affects
the eyes.
Dementia (di-men-sha): A loss of brain function that can be caused by a
variety of disorders affecting the brain. Symptoms include forgetfulness,
impaired thinking and judgment, personality changes, agitation and loss of
emotional control. Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease and inadequate
blood flow to the brain can all cause dementia. Most types of dementia are
irreversible.
Inflammation (in-fluh-mey-shun): The redness and warmth around a cut or
scrape is short-term inflammation, produced by the immune system to aid
healing. But another type called chronic inflammation, triggered by
compounds from abdominal fat, gum disease and other factors, lingers in the
body. Research suggests this type increases the risk for heart disease,
diabetes, dementia and some forms of cancer.
Lean protein: Meats and other protein-rich foods low in saturated fat.
These include boneless skinless chicken and turkey, extra-lean ground beef,
beans, fat-free yogurt, seafood, tofu, tempeh and lean cuts of red meat,
such as round steaks and roasts, top loin and top sirloin. Choosing these
can help control cholesterol.
Neurons (nyoo-rons): Brain cells that communicate with one another via an
enormous network of hairlike extensions called axons and dendrites, which
send and receive electrical signals. The human brain contains an estimated
100 billion neurons. These cells and networks store memories and control
thinking speed and ability. Exercise, and emerging evidence has suggested a
healthy diet, help the brain grow new neurons and connections at any age.
Risk factor: Anything that boosts your chances of getting a disease. For
example, smoking is a risk factor for cancer, and obesity is a risk factor
for diabetes.
Tau Proteins (taw pro-teenz): A protein that makes up the tangles found
inside the brain cells in people with Alzheimer’s disease. In healthy brain
cells, tau helps keep straight the tiny tubes that are used to move food
and other important materials to where it is needed. But when strands of
tau twist together and form tangles, food or building supplies can no
longer move through the cells, which ultimately die.
Whole grains: Grains such as whole wheat, brown rice and barley still have
their fiber-rich outer shell, called the bran, and inner germ. It provides
vitamins, minerals and good fats. Choosing whole grain side dishes,
cereals, breads and more may lower the risk for heart disease, type 2
diabetes and cancer and improve digestion, too.
Find a Doctor
Specializing In:
Cognitive Disorders
Alzheimer's Disease (AD)
Dementia
Behavioral Disorders in Dementia
Disorders of Social Cognition
Neurology
Neurological Disease
Memory Disorders
Cognitive Decline in Older Adults
Geriatric Psychiatry
See More
Find a Treatment Center
Memory and Alzheimers Treatment Center
Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology
Memory Disorders Center
See More
Find Additional Treatment Centers at:
Howard County Medical Center
Sibley Memorial Hospital
Suburban Hospital
Care in the Home
Johns Hopkins Care at Home: Memory Care
Related
Does Higher Learning Combat Dementia?
Memory: Myth Versus Truth
Hidden Brain Risk: Midlife High Blood Pressure
Memory Lapse or Dementia?
Request an Appointment
Find a Doctor
410-955-5000
Maryland
855-695-4872
Outside of Maryland
+1-410-502-7683
International
Find a Doctor
See More
Related
Dementia
Does Higher Learning Combat Dementia?
Science of Memory
Memory: Myth Versus Truth
Healthy Mind
Hidden Brain Risk: Midlife High Blood Pressure
Related Topics
Aging Well
Mind and Memory
Alzheimer's Disease
Dementia
Maintaining a Healthy Mind as You Age
Age-Related Depression, Mood and Stress
Health
Conditions and DiseasesTreatments, Tests and TherapiesWellness and PreventionCaregiving
Language Assistance Available:
Español
አማርኛ
繁體中文
Français
Tagalog
Русский
Português
Italiano
Tiếng Việt
Ɓàsɔ́ɔ̀-wùɖù-po-nyɔ̀
Igbo asusu
èdè Yorùbá
বাংলা
日本語
한국어
Kreyòl Ayisyen
العربية
Deutsch
Polski
Ελληνικά
ગુજરાતી
ภาษาไทย
اُردُو
فارسی
हिंदी
Deitsch
ខ្មែរ
Contact & Privacy Information
Price Transparency
Contact Us | Patient Care Locations
Notice of Privacy Practices | Privacy Statement
Terms & Conditions of Use | Non-Discrimination Notice
Manage Cookie Preferences
Copyright © 2024
The Johns Hopkins University, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, and Johns Hopkins Health System. All rights reserved.