Alzheimer's disease - Symptoms and causes - Mayo Clinic
This content does not have an English version.This content does not have an Arabic version.
Skip to contentCare at
Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health
Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical
Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education
at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to
Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation
Request appointment Log inSearchMenu Request appointment Donate Diseases & conditions Find a doctorCare at Mayo Clinic Patient-Centered Care About Mayo Clinic Request Appointment Find a Doctor Locations Clinical Trials Connect to Support Groups Patient & Visitor Guide Billing & Insurance Departments & Centers International Services Contact UsPatient & Visitor Guide Health Library Diseases & Conditions Symptoms Tests & Procedures Drugs & Supplements Healthy Lifestyle Books & SubscriptionsDiseases & Conditions For Medical Professionals Medical Professional Resources Refer a Patient Continuing Medical Education AskMayoExpert Mayo Clinic Laboratories Video Center Journals & Publications Mayo Clinic Alumni AssociationContinuing Medical Education Research & Education at Mayo ClinicResearch Research at Mayo Clinic Research Faculty Laboratories Core Facilities Centers & Programs Departments & Divisions Clinical Trials Institutional Review Board Postdoctoral Fellowships Training Grant ProgramsEducation Mayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Mayo Clinic Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences Mayo Clinic Alix School of Medicine Mayo Clinic School of Graduate Medical Education Mayo Clinic School of Health Sciences Mayo Clinic School of Continuous Professional DevelopmentMayo Clinic College of Medicine and Science Giving to Mayo Clinic Give Now Giving to Mayo Clinic Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us to GiveMake a Donation
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Alzheimer's disease
Request an Appointment
Symptoms &causesDiagnosis &treatmentDoctors &departmentsCare atMayo Clinic
Print
OverviewAlzheimer's disease is a brain disorder that gets worse over time. It's characterized by changes in the brain that lead to deposits of certain proteins. Alzheimer's disease causes the brain to shrink and brain cells to eventually die. Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia — a gradual decline in memory, thinking, behavior and social skills. These changes affect a person's ability to function.
About 6.5 million people in the United States age 65 and older live with Alzheimer's disease. Among them, more than 70% are 75 years old and older. Of the about 55 million people worldwide with dementia, 60% to 70% are estimated to have Alzheimer's disease.
The early signs of the disease include forgetting recent events or conversations. Over time, it progresses to serious memory problems and loss of the ability to perform everyday tasks.
Medicines may improve or slow the progression of symptoms. Programs and services can help support people with the disease and their caregivers.
There is no treatment that cures Alzheimer's disease. In advanced stages, severe loss of brain function can cause dehydration, malnutrition or infection. These complications can result in death.Products & ServicesA Book: Day to Day: Living With DementiaA Book: Mayo Clinic on Alzheimer's DiseaseA Book: Mayo Clinic on Healthy AgingAssortment of Products for Independent Living from Mayo Clinic StoreShow more products from Mayo Clinic
SymptomsMemory loss is the key symptom of Alzheimer's disease. Early signs include difficulty remembering recent events or conversations. But memory gets worse and other symptoms develop as the disease progresses.
At first, someone with the disease may be aware of having trouble remembering things and thinking clearly. As symptoms get worse, a family member or friend may be more likely to notice the issues.
Brain changes associated with Alzheimer's disease lead to growing trouble with:
MemoryEveryone has memory lapses at times, but the memory loss associated with Alzheimer's disease persists and gets worse. Over time, memory loss affects the ability to function at work or at home.
People with Alzheimer's disease may:
Repeat statements and questions over and over.
Forget conversations, appointments or events.
Misplace items, often putting them in places that don't make sense.
Get lost in places they used to know well.
Eventually forget the names of family members and everyday objects.
Have trouble finding the right words for objects, expressing thoughts or taking part in conversations.
Thinking and reasoningAlzheimer's disease causes difficulty concentrating and thinking, especially about abstract concepts such as numbers.
Doing more than one task at once is especially difficult. It may be challenging to manage finances, balance checkbooks and pay bills on time. Eventually, a person with Alzheimer's disease may be unable to recognize and deal with numbers.
Making judgments and decisionsAlzheimer's disease causes a decline in the ability to make sensible decisions and judgments in everyday situations. For example, a person may make poor choices in social settings or wear clothes for the wrong type of weather. It may become harder for someone to respond to everyday problems. For example, the person may not know how to handle food burning on the stove or decisions when driving.
Planning and performing familiar tasksRoutine activities that require completing steps in order become a struggle. This may include planning and cooking a meal or playing a favorite game. Eventually, people with advanced Alzheimer's disease forget how to do basic tasks such as dressing and bathing.
Changes in personality and behaviorBrain changes that occur in Alzheimer's disease can affect moods and behaviors. Problems may include the following:
Depression.
Loss of interest in activities.
Social withdrawal.
Mood swings.
Distrust in others.
Anger or aggression.
Changes in sleeping habits.
Wandering.
Loss of inhibitions.
Delusions, such as believing something has been stolen.
Preserved skillsDespite major changes to memory and skills, people with Alzheimer's disease are able to hold on to some skills even as symptoms get worse. Preserved skills may include reading or listening to books, telling stories, sharing memories, singing, listening to music, dancing, drawing, or doing crafts.
These skills may be preserved longer because they're controlled by parts of the brain affected later in the course of the disease.
When to see a doctorA number of conditions can result in memory loss or other dementia symptoms. Some of those conditions can be treated. If you are concerned about your memory or other thinking skills, talk to your health care professional.
If you are concerned about thinking skills you observe in a family member or friend, talk about your concerns and ask about going together to talk to a health care professional.More InformationAlzheimer's disease care at Mayo ClinicAlzheimer's stagesMemory loss: When to seek helpSundowning: Late-day confusionShow more related information
Request an appointment
There is a problem with
information submitted for this request. Review/update the
information highlighted below and resubmit the form.
From Mayo Clinic to your inbox
Sign up for free and stay up to date on research advancements, health tips, current health topics, and expertise on managing health. Click here for an email preview.
Email
Address 1
ErrorEmail field is required
ErrorInclude a valid email address
Learn more about Mayo Clinic’s use of data.
To provide you with the most relevant and helpful information, and understand which
information is beneficial, we may combine your email and website usage information with
other information we have about you. If you are a Mayo Clinic patient, this could
include protected health information. If we combine this information with your protected
health information, we will treat all of that information as protected health
information and will only use or disclose that information as set forth in our notice of
privacy practices. You may opt-out of email communications at any time by clicking on
the unsubscribe link in the e-mail.
Subscribe!
Thank you for subscribing!
You'll soon start receiving the latest Mayo Clinic health information you requested in your inbox.
Sorry something went wrong with your subscription
Please, try again in a couple of minutes
Retry
Causes
Healthy brain and brain with Alzheimer's disease
Enlarge image
Close
Healthy brain and brain with Alzheimer's disease
Healthy brain and brain with Alzheimer's disease
In the brain of someone with Alzheimer's disease, amyloid plaques form and tau proteins change shape and become tangles.
The exact causes of Alzheimer's disease aren't fully understood. But at a basic level, brain proteins fail to function as usual. This disrupts the work of brain cells, also called neurons, and triggers a series of events. The neurons become damaged and lose connections to each other. They eventually die.
Scientists believe that for most people, Alzheimer's disease is caused by a combination of genetic, lifestyle and environmental factors that affect the brain over time. In less than 1% of cases, Alzheimer's is caused by specific genetic changes that almost guarantee a person will develop the disease. In these cases, the disease usually begins in middle age.
The development of the disease begins years before the first symptoms. The damage most often starts in the region of the brain that controls memory. The loss of neurons spreads in a somewhat predictable pattern to other regions of the brain. By the late stage of the disease, the brain has shrunk significantly.
Researchers trying to understand the cause of Alzheimer's disease are focused on the role of two proteins:
Plaques. Beta-amyloid is a fragment of a larger protein. When these fragments clump together, they appear to have a toxic effect on neurons and to disrupt communication between brain cells. These clumps form larger deposits called amyloid plaques, which also include other cellular debris.
Tangles. Tau proteins play a part in a brain cell's internal support and transport system to carry nutrients and other essential materials. In Alzheimer's disease, tau proteins change shape and organize into structures called neurofibrillary tangles. The tangles disrupt the transport system and cause damage to cells.
More InformationAlzheimer's disease care at Mayo ClinicMayo Clinic Minute: Women and Alzheimer's Disease
Risk factorsAgeIncreasing age is the greatest known risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's isn't a part of typical aging. But as you grow older, the chances of developing it increases.
One study found that every year there were four new diagnoses per 1,000 people ages 65 to 74. Among people ages 75 to 84, there were 32 new diagnoses per 1,000 people. For those 85 and older, there were 76 new diagnoses per 1,000 people.
Family history and geneticsThe risk of developing Alzheimer's is somewhat higher if a first-degree relative — your parent or sibling — has the disease. Just how genes among families affect the risk is largely unexplained, and the genetic factors are likely complex.
A better understood genetic factor is a form of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene. A form of the gene, APOE e4, increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease. About 25% to 30% of the population carries APOE e4. But not everyone with this form of the gene develops the disease.
Scientists have found rare changes in three genes that virtually guarantee a person who inherits one of them will develop Alzheimer's. But these changes account for less than 1% of people with Alzheimer's disease.
Down syndromeMany people with Down syndrome develop Alzheimer's disease. This is likely related to having three copies of chromosome 21. Chromosome 21 is the gene involved in the production of the protein that leads to the creation of beta-amyloid. Beta-amyloid fragments can become plaques in the brain. Symptoms tend to appear 10 to 20 years earlier in people with Down syndrome than they do for the general population.
SexOverall there are more women with the disease because they tend to live longer than men.
Mild cognitive impairmentSomeone with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has a decline in memory or other thinking skills that is greater than usual for the person's age. But the decline doesn't prevent the person from functioning in social or work environments.
However, people with MCI have a significant risk of developing dementia. When MCI affects mainly memory, the condition is more likely to progress to dementia due to Alzheimer's disease. A diagnosis of MCI offers people the chance to put a greater focus on healthy lifestyle changes and to come up with strategies to make up for memory loss. They also can schedule regular health care appointments to monitor symptoms.
Head traumaSeveral large studies found that people age 50 years or older who had a traumatic brain injury (TBI) had an increased risk of dementia and Alzheimer's disease. The risk is even higher in people with more-severe and multiple TBIs. Some studies found that the risk may be greatest within the first six months to two years after the injury.
Air pollutionStudies in animals have found that air pollution particulates can speed the breakdown of the nervous system. And human studies have found that air pollution exposure — especially from traffic exhaust and burning wood — is linked to a greater dementia risk.
Excessive alcohol consumptionDrinking large amounts of alcohol has long been known to cause brain changes. Several large studies and reviews found that alcohol use disorders were linked to an increased risk of dementia — early-onset dementia in particular.
Poor sleep patternsResearch has shown that poor sleep patterns, such as trouble falling asleep or staying asleep, are linked to an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Lifestyle and heart healthResearch has shown that the same risk factors associated with heart disease also may increase the risk of dementia. It's unclear if these factors increase risk of dementia by worsening Alzheimer's changes in the brain or by leading to brain vascular changes. They include:
Lack of exercise.
Obesity.
Smoking or exposure to secondhand smoke.
High blood pressure.
High cholesterol.
Poorly controlled type 2 diabetes.
These factors can all be modified. Therefore, changing lifestyle habits can to some degree alter your risk. For example, regular exercise and a healthy low-fat diet rich in fruits and vegetables are related to a lower risk of Alzheimer's disease.
Lifelong learning and social engagementStudies have found that socializing and engaging in activities that stimulate the mind throughout life can lower the risk of Alzheimer's disease. Low education levels — less than a high school education — appear to be a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.
ComplicationsAlzheimer's symptoms such as memory loss, language loss, impaired judgment and other brain changes can make it harder to manage other health conditions. A person with Alzheimer's disease may not be able to:
Tell someone about being in pain.
Explain symptoms of another illness.
Follow a treatment plan.
Explain medicine side effects.
As Alzheimer's disease moves into its last stages, brain changes begin to affect physical functions. The changes can affect the ability to swallow, balance, and control bowel and bladder movements. These effects can lead to other health problems such as:
Inhaling food or liquid into the lungs.
Flu, pneumonia and other infections.
Falls.
Fractures.
Bedsores.
Poor nutrition or dehydration.
Constipation or diarrhea.
Dental problems such as mouth sores or tooth decay.
PreventionAlzheimer's disease is not a preventable condition. However, a number of lifestyle risk factors can be modified.
Evidence suggests that taking steps to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease may also lower your risk of developing dementia.
To follow heart-healthy lifestyle choices that may reduce the risk of dementia:
Exercise regularly.
Eat a diet of fresh produce, healthy oils and foods low in saturated fat, such as a Mediterranean diet.
Follow treatment guidelines to manage high blood pressure, diabetes and high cholesterol.
If you smoke, ask your health care professional for help to quit.
One large, long-term study done in Finland found that making lifestyle changes helped reduce cognitive decline among people who were at risk of dementia. Those in the study were given individual and group sessions that focused on diet, exercise and social activities.
In another study done in Australia, people at risk of dementia were given coaching sessions on diet, exercise and other lifestyle changes. They had better results on cognitive tests after one, two and three years compared to people who didn't receive the coaching.
Other studies have shown that staying engaged mentally and socially is linked to preserved thinking skills later in life and a lower risk of Alzheimer's disease. This includes going to social events, reading, dancing, playing board games, creating art, playing an instrument and other activities.More InformationAlzheimer's disease care at Mayo ClinicAlzheimer's prevention: Does it exist?
By Mayo Clinic Staff
Alzheimer's disease care at Mayo Clinic
Request an appointment
Diagnosis & treatment
July 10, 2024
Print
Show references
Jankovic J, et al., eds. Alzheimer disease and other dementias. In: Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice. 8th ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Sept. 21, 2022.
Alzheimer's disease fact sheet. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers-disease-fact-sheet. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Livingston G, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of The Lancet Commission. The Lancet. 2020; doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30367-6.
Chen L, et al. Plasma tau proteins for the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience. 2022; doi:10.3389/fnagi.2022.942629.
Dementia. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Alzheimer's disease and related dementias. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/aging/aginginfo/alzheimers.htm. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
What is dementia? Symptoms, types, and diagnosis. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/diagnosing-dementia. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Biomarkers for dementia detection and research. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/biomarkers-dementia-detection-and-research. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Middle-stage caregiving. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/help-support/caregiving/stages-behaviors/middle-stage. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Kellerman RD, et al. Alzheimer's disease. In: Conn's Current Therapy 2022. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Sept. 21, 2022.
Ferri FF. Alzheimer disease. In: Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2023. Elsevier; 2023. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Early-stage caregiving. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/help-support/caregiving/stages-behaviors/early-stage. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Alzheimer's disease at a glance. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. https://nccih.nih.gov/health/alzheimer/ataglance. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Budson AE, et al. Alzheimer's disease. In: Memory Loss, Alzheimer's Disease, and Dementia. 3rd ed. Elsevier; 2022. https://www.clinicalkey.com. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Coping with late-stage Alzheimer's disease. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/coping-late-stage-alzheimers-disease. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Levenson JL, ed. Dementia. In: The American Psychiatric Association Publishing Textbook of Psychosomatic Medicine and Consultation-Liaison Psychiatry. 3rd ed. American Psychiatric Association Publishing; 2019. https://psychiatryonline.org. Accessed Oct. 3, 2022.
Dementia: Lifestyle and management. American Geriatrics Society. https://www.healthinaging.org/a-z-topic/dementia/lifestyle. Accessed Oct. 5, 2022.
Is Alzheimer's genetic? Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/what-is-alzheimers/causes-and-risk-factors/genetics. Accessed Oct. 6, 2022.
Ami T. Allscripts EPSi. Mayo Clinic. July 6, 2022.
Alzheimer's disease research centers. National Institute on Aging. https://www.nia.nih.gov/health/alzheimers-disease-research-centers#minnesota. Accessed Sept. 26, 2022.
About the Alzheimer's Consortium. Arizona Alzheimer's Consortium. https://azalz.org/about/#institutes. Accessed Sept. 26, 2022.
Graff-Radford J (expert opinion). Mayo Clinic. Oct. 6, 2022.
Shi M, et al. Impact of anti-amyloid-β monoclonal antibodies on the pathology and clinical profile of Alzheimer's disease: A focus on aducanumab and lecanemab. Frontiers in Aging and Neuroscience. 2022; doi:10.3389/fnagi.2022.870517.
Cummings J, et al. Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline: 2022. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2022; doi:10.1002/trc2.12295.
Leqembi (prescribing information). Eisai Inc.; 2023. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=overview.process&varApplNo=761269. Accessed July 10, 2023.
Mintun MA, et al. Donanemab in early Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2021; doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2100708.
2022 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures. Alzheimer's Association. https://www.alz.org/alzheimers-dementia/facts-figures. Accessed Oct. 4, 2022.
Rosenberg A, et al. Multidomain interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease and dementia: From FINGER to world-wide FINGERS. The Journal of Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease. 2020; doi:10.14283/jpad.2019.41.
Bleicher K, et al. Cohort profile update: The 45 and up study. International Journal of Epidemiology. 2022; doi:10.1093/ije/dyac104.
Leqembi (approval letter). Biologic License Application 761269. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=overview.process&ApplNo=761269. Accessed July 7, 2023.
Swaddiwudhipong N, et al. Pre-diagnostic cognitive and functional impairment in multiple sporadic neurodegenerative diseases. Alzheimer's and Dementia. 2022; doi:10.1002/alz.12802.
Van Dyck CH, et al. Lecanemab in early Alzheimer's disease. New England Journal of Medicine. 2023; doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2212948.
Kisunla (approval letter). Biologic License Application 761248. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.cfm?event=BasicSearch.process. Accessed July 9, 2024.
Sims JR, et al. Donanemab in early symptomatic Alzheimer disease: The TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2023; doi:10.1001/jama.2023.13239.
Kisunla (prescribing information). Eli Lilly and Company; 2024. https://www.lilly.com/. Accessed July 3, 2024.
Related
Alzheimer's 101
Alzheimer's drugs
Alzheimer's genes
Alzheimer's prevention: Does it exist?
Alzheimer's stages
Alzheimer's: New treatments
Brain atrophy and Alzheimer's
Brain scan images for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
Diagnosing Alzheimer's
Did the definition of Alzheimer's disease change?
Healthy brain and brain with Alzheimer's disease
Lecanemab for Alzheimer's disease
Mayo Clinic Minute: 3 tips to reduce your risk of Alzheimer's disease
Mayo Clinic Minute: Alzheimer's disease risk and lifestyle
Mayo Clinic Minute: New definition of Alzheimer's changes
Mayo Clinic Minute: Women and Alzheimer's Disease
Memory loss: When to seek help
New Alzheimers Research
Sundowning: Late-day confusion
Understanding the difference between dementia types
Video: Alzheimer's drug shows early promise
Young-onset Alzheimer's
Show more related content
Associated Procedures
CT scan
MRI
Positron emission tomography scan
News from Mayo Clinic
Mayo Clinic Q and A: My mom has Alzheimer's. What does that mean for me?
Sept. 16, 2024, 04:07 p.m.
CDT
Biology-based criteria for diagnosis, staging of Alzheimer's disease
June 27, 2024, 05:06 p.m.
CDT
Researchers identify vascular changes in the brain linked to Alzheimer's disease
June 20, 2024, 02:34 p.m.
CDT
Welcoming the community into Alzheimer's disease research studies
May 16, 2024, 02:00 p.m.
CDT
Mayo Clinic researchers' new tool links Alzheimer's disease types to rate of cognitive decline
April 30, 2024, 03:29 p.m.
CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Reducing risk of Alzheimer's disease in families
Nov. 13, 2023, 04:02 p.m.
CDT
Alzheimer's drug lecanemab granted full approval by FDA, Mayo Clinic expert weighs in
July 06, 2023, 09:55 p.m.
CDT
Mayo Clinic expert talks benefits, risks of experimental Alzheimer's drug
May 04, 2023, 04:17 p.m.
CDT
$41 million federal grant to help Mayo Clinic, collaborators advance multiethnic Alzheimer's research
March 28, 2023, 03:00 p.m.
CDT
What is clinically meaningful to slow Alzheimer's progression?
Feb. 07, 2023, 03:10 p.m.
CDT
Mayo Clinic expert provides perspective on FDA approval of another experimental Alzheimer's drug
Jan. 06, 2023, 08:50 p.m.
CDT
Mayo Clinic Minute: Family risk of Alzheimer's disease
Nov. 14, 2022, 04:25 p.m.
CDT
Show more news from Mayo Clinic
Products & Services
A Book: Day to Day: Living With Dementia
A Book: Mayo Clinic on Alzheimer's Disease
A Book: Mayo Clinic on Healthy Aging
Assortment of Products for Independent Living from Mayo Clinic Store
Show more products and services from Mayo Clinic
Alzheimer's diseaseSymptoms&causesDiagnosis&treatmentDoctors&departmentsCare atMayoClinic
Advertisement
Mayo Clinic does not endorse companies or products. Advertising revenue supports our not-for-profit mission.
Advertising & Sponsorship
Policy
Opportunities
Ad Choices
Mayo Clinic Press
Check out these best-sellers and special offers on books and newsletters from Mayo Clinic Press.
NEW: Listen to Health Matters Podcast - Mayo Clinic PressNEW: Listen to Health Matters PodcastMayo Clinic on Incontinence - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on IncontinenceThe Essential Diabetes Book - Mayo Clinic PressThe Essential Diabetes BookMayo Clinic on Hearing and Balance - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic on Hearing and BalanceFREE Mayo Clinic Diet Assessment - Mayo Clinic PressFREE Mayo Clinic Diet AssessmentMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book - Mayo Clinic PressMayo Clinic Health Letter - FREE book
CON-20155101
Patient Care & Health Information
Diseases & Conditions
Alzheimer's disease
Your gift holds great power – donate today! DonateMake your tax-deductible gift and be a part of the cutting-edge research and care that's changing medicine.
Donate
Find a doctor Explore careers Sign up for free e-newslettersAbout Mayo Clinic
About this Site Contact Us Locations Health Information Policy Medicare Accountable Care Organization (ACO) Media Requests News Network Price TransparencyMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationMedical Professionals
AskMayoExpert Clinical Trials Mayo Clinic Alumni Association Refer a PatientBusinesses
Executive Health Program International Business Collaborations Facilities & Real Estate Supplier InformationStudents
Admissions Requirements Degree Programs Student & Faculty PortalStudents
Degree Programs Admissions Requirements Student & Faculty PortalResearchers
Research Faculty LaboratoriesInternational Patients
Appointments Financial Services International Locations & OfficesCharitable Care & Financial Assistance
Community Health Needs Assessment Financial Assistance Documents – Arizona Financial Assistance Documents – Florida Financial Assistance Documents – MinnesotaFollow Mayo Clinic X Youtube Facebook Linkedin InstagramGet the Mayo Clinic app
Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising & Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage Cookies Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Notice of Privacy Practices Notice of Nondiscrimination Accessibility Statement Advertising and Sponsorship Policy Site Map Manage CookiesLanguage:English English Español العربية 简体中文© 1998-2024 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research (MFMER). All rights reserved.
Language:English English Español العربية 简体中文