FDA fully approves Leqembi, first drug shown to slow Alzheimer's : Shots - Health News : NPR
Accessibility links
Skip to main content
Keyboard shortcuts for audio player
Open Navigation Menu
Newsletters
NPR Shop
Close Navigation Menu
Home
News
Expand/collapse submenu for News
National
World
Politics
Business
Health
Science
Climate
Race
Culture
Expand/collapse submenu for Culture
Books
Movies
Television
Pop Culture
Food
Art & Design
Performing Arts
Life Kit
Gaming
Music
Expand/collapse submenu for Music
Music Features
Tiny Desk
Live Sessions
Hip-Hop 50
All Songs Considered
Podcasts & Shows
Expand/collapse submenu for Podcasts & Shows
Daily
Morning Edition
Weekend Edition Saturday
Weekend Edition Sunday
All Things Considered
Fresh Air
Up First
Featured
The NPR Politics Podcast
Throughline
Trump's Trials
Wild Card with Rachel Martin
More Podcasts & Shows
Search
Newsletters
NPR Shop
Music Features
Tiny Desk
Live Sessions
Hip-Hop 50
All Songs Considered
About NPR
Diversity
Support
Careers
Press
Ethics
FDA fully approves Leqembi, first drug shown to slow Alzheimer's : Shots - Health News The first drug found to slow the progression of Alzheimer's disease has been granted full approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
Shots
Health News From NPR
Your Health Treatments & Tests Health Inc. Policy-ish Public Health
Twitter
Policy-ish
Alzheimer's drug Leqembi gets full FDA approval. Medicare coverage will likely follow
July 6, 20234:48 PM ET
Heard on
Morning Edition
Jon Hamilton
Alzheimer's drug Leqembi gets full FDA approval. Medicare coverage will likely follow
Listen
·
3:44
3:44
Toggle more options
Download
Embed
Embed
<iframe src="https://www.npr.org/player/embed/1186225580/1186338473" width="100%" height="290" frameborder="0" scrolling="no" title="NPR embedded audio player">
Transcript
Enlarge this image
The Food and Drug Administration has fully approved Leqembi, the first drug shown to slow down Alzheimer's disease.
Andrew Harnik/AP
hide caption
toggle caption
Andrew Harnik/AP
The Food and Drug Administration has fully approved Leqembi, the first drug shown to slow down Alzheimer's disease.
Andrew Harnik/AP
The Food and Drug Administration has fully approved the first drug shown to slow down Alzheimer's disease. The action means that Leqembi, whose generic name is lecanemab, should be widely covered by the federal Medicare health insurance program, which primarily serves adults age 65 and older. So more people who are in the early stages of the disease will have access to the drug – and be able to afford it. "It's not something that's going to stop the disease or reverse it," says Dr . Sanjeev Vaishnavi, director of clinical research at the Penn Memory Center. "But it may slow down progression of the disease and may give people more meaningful time with their families."
Sponsor Message
In studies reviewed by the FDA, Leqembi appeared to slow declines in memory and thinking by about 27% after 18 months of treatment. It also dramatically reduced the sticky beta-amyloid plaques that tend to build up in the brains of people with Alzheimer's. "It's very exciting that we're targeting the actual pathology of the disease," Vaishnavi says.
Shots - Health News
An Alzheimer's drug is on the way, but getting it may still be tough. Here's why
Just to be talking about a treatment "is an incredible point for the Alzheimer's cause overall," says Joanne Pike, president and CEO of the Alzheimer's Association. Leqembi comes from the Japanese pharmaceutical company Eisai and its U.S. partner Biogen. The companies have said Leqembi will cost about $26,500 a year. In January, the drug received what's known as accelerated approval from the FDA, based on its ability to remove the substance beta-amyloid from the brains of people in the early stages of Alzheimer's. Full or traditional approval reflects the FDA's assessment that Leqembi also helps preserve memory and thinking.
Shots - Health News
With early Alzheimer's in the family, these sisters decided to test for the gene
Also in January, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services announced it would broaden coverage of Leqembi on the same day the drug received full FDA approval. That should mean the drug will now be covered for most Medicare patients with early signs of cognitive problems and elevated levels of amyloid.
Wider coverage, limited use Until now, Medicare has paid for Leqembi only for patients in certain clinical trials. Under the expanded coverage, a million or more Medicare patients are potential candidates for the drug. But it's likely that a much smaller number will actually get it in the next year or so.
Shots - Health News
Huntington's spreads like 'fire in the brain.' Scientists say they've found the spark
One reason is the drug's potentially life-threatening side effects, Vaishnavi says. "I think [patients] are a little wary because they hear about bleeding or swelling in the brain," Vaishnavi says. "They are concerned, and I think rightfully so." Another limiting factor is that the U.S. healthcare system simply isn't prepared to diagnose, treat, and monitor a large number of Alzheimer's patients, Pike says. Leqembi requires an initial test to determine amyloid levels in the brain, intravenous infusions every other week, and periodic brain scans to detect side effects.
Sponsor Message
"We don't have enough specialists who understand how to provide this treatment," Pike says. "We don't have enough primary care physicians with knowledge and the confidence to provide a referral." But Leqembi does have much more support from doctors and payers than an ill-fated predecessor. In 2021, the FDA granted conditional approval to a drug called Aduhelm. It also removes amyloid from the brain.
But it was unclear whether Aduhelm, also known as aducanumab,
slowed down the loss of memory and thinking. So many doctors refused to prescribe it. And Medicare declined to cover the costly drug, except for patients in certain clinical trials. Leqembi shouldn't have those problems. 'You really don't have anything to lose' "It seems that the scientific and clinician community understands the difference in this moment with Leqembi versus Aduhelm," Pike says. Much of what scientists have learned about Leqembi is thanks to people like Ken and Susan Bell in St. Charles, Missouri. Susan, who is 70, began showing signs of Alzheimer's about four years ago. So she enrolled in a clinical trial of Leqembi at Washington University in St. Louis and has been receiving the drug ever since. The drug hasn't stopped the disease, though.
Shots - Health News
Having an out-of-body experience? Blame this sausage-shaped piece of your brain
"There has been, certainly, some degradation in her cognitive powers and so forth," Ken says. But Susan's decline has been relatively slow. The couple are still able to travel and play golf, which could signal that the drug is working.
"We don't have enough experience, like the medical folks do, to know what would have happened" without the drug, Ken says. Still, Susan thinks other people in the early stages of Alzheimer's should try Leqembi. "I would tell them, 'Go for it,'" she says, "because you really don't have anything to lose."
Medicare
leqembi
lecanemab
Aduhelm
aducanumab
Alzheimer's research
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services
Alzheimer's
Alzheimer's disease
Facebook
Flipboard
Email
Shots
Health News From NPR
Read & Listen
Home
News
Culture
Music
Podcasts & Shows
Connect
Newsletters
Facebook
Instagram
Press
Public Editor
Corrections
Contact & Help
About NPR
Overview
Diversity
NPR Network
Accessibility
Ethics
Finances
Get Involved
Support Public Radio
Sponsor NPR
NPR Careers
NPR Shop
NPR Events
NPR Extra
Terms of Use
Privacy
Your Privacy Choices
Text Only
Sponsor MessageBecome an NPR sponsor